---
id: ch2sec2
aliases: []
tags: []
---

## A Tribute To Red Iran {#sec:ch2sec2}

Jalil Ziapour was born into a working-class family on April 25, 1920, in Bandar-e Anzali, a port city on the northern coast of Iran, just 25 miles from the capital of Gilan (Gilān) Province Rasht.
As the eldest son of a large family, Ziapour faced considerable pressure to pursue his father's footsteps as a shoemaker and contribute to the family's financial stability. However, his deep-seated passion for artistic expression—manifested through music, painting, and sculpture—led him to challenge these familial expectations, instead embracing an artist's precarious path.[@ziapourJalilZiapourFather2009]

The establishment of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Iran (SSRI), also known as the Gilan Republic, coincided with Ziapour's birth, marking the beginning of a sixteen-month socialist experiment that would shape the region's intellectual climate, later shaping Ziapour's artistic trajectory.
Founded in June 1920, the SSRI was a short-lived socialist state with Rasht, a vibrant city in northern Iran, serving as its capital, and Bandar-e Anzali---Ziapour's hometown---an initial base for the revolutionaries and a strategically crucial port city in the Caspian Sea connecting the republic to the Soviet Union in the north.
The revolutionaries behind the SSRI had ambitious goals that extended beyond the borders of Gilan. They sought to challenge British imperialism, disrupt the established power in Tehran, and ultimately overthrow the Iranian ruling class.
The formation of the SSRI was a bold attempt to reshape the political landscape of Iran and assert the region's autonomy in the face of foreign influence.[@hallidayIranDictatorshipDevelopment1978 p. 109]

According to sociologist Peyman Vahabzadeh, the SSRI and the 1921 coup led by Cossack officer Reza Khan (Rezā Khān) represented two contrasting responses to "the failed" Constitutional Revolution (1906--11).^[@vahabzadehWhenRedFlag.
The first Majlis (parliament), established following the Constitutional Revolution, fell short of implementing significant land reform due to the dominant presence of landowners within the legislative body.
This lack of action towards redistributing land and addressing economic inequalities contributed to the growing discontent among the rural population. @hallidayIranDictatorshipDevelopment1978 p. 109]
The SSRI demonstrated a resolute commitment to radical change by redistributing large estates to the peasantry and exempting them from taxes for three years.[@vahabzadehWhenRedFlag]
However, despite its progressive agenda and initial successes, the SSRI's brief reign ended with the fall of Rasht on October 15, 1921.[Internal conflicts, mistrust, and external pressures, including the growing influence of the British-backed central government in Tehran, contributed to the SSRI's collapse. Vahabzadeh attributes the downfall of SSRI to the rift between communists and nationalists, notably Iran's wealthy landowners and merchants, and the Soviet wavering concerning national treaties. @vahabzadehWhenRedFlag]
The SSRI's demise paved the way for the consolidation of power under Reza Khan, who was later crowned as Reza Shah Pahlavi founding the Pahlavi dynasty, which would remain in power until the revolution of 1979.
While pursuing a modernization and centralization program, the Pahlavi state largely maintained the existing power hierarchies, economic inequalities, and colonial interests that the SSRI had sought to dismantle.

In 1938, Ziapour embarked on his formal artistic education in Tehran, initially enrolling in Music Composition at the School of Music (*honarestān-e ā`liy-e musiqi*) under the supervision of Belgian instructors.^[Ziapour discussed this period in an interview with Morteza Monsef in @ziapourJalilZiapourFather2009. While Ziapour referenced Belgian faculty, other historical accounts suggest Czech instructors were present during this period. See @aryanpurDevelopmentMusicEducation2001 p. 91. Before Colonel Vaziri's directorship, Gholamhossein Minbāshiyān had established a comprehensive curriculum integrating Iranian and Western music, engaging notable figures like Sādeq Hedāyat, Abdolhossein Nushin, and Nimā Yushij.]
However, his musical studies were cut short when Colonel Vaziri (1886--1979) assumed directorship and discontinued several Western music programs, including composition.

Following this shift in curriculum, Ziapour enrolled in the School of Iranian Fine Arts (*Honarestān-e Honarhāy-e Ziābay-e Irāni*), established by Hossein Behzād as The Academy of Fine Arts (*Madreseh-ye sanāyeʿ-e mostazrafeh ghadim-e*) in 1930. In contrast to Kamal-ol-Molk's academy, which had emphasized European artistic canon, this institution aligned with Reza Shah's cultural revivalist policies by focusing on indigenous applied and decorative arts. Here, Ziapour studied traditional practices including gilding books (*tazhib*), carpet design (*naqshe qali*), tile work (*kashikari*), and traditional manuscript painting (*negargari*).[@ziapourJalilZiapourFather2009 p. 5] When the Faculty of Fine Arts was established at the University of Tehran in 1940, Ziapour continued his artistic education there, ultimately becoming one of its first graduates in 1946.[@zokaHalfCenturyPursuit p. 74]

In the years immediately following his graduation, Ziapour made a notable debut at the Fine Arts Exhibition of Iran (*Namāyesgāh-e honarhā-ye zibā-ye Iran*), where he showcased two early paintings: *The Uprising of Kaveh* (*Qiyām-e Kāveh*, c.1945, @fig:ziapourKaveh) and *Shirin and Farhad* (date?). In his review of the exhibition, Reza Jorjani (Rezā Jorjāni), an Iranian art critic and a professor of literature, mentions the paintings in passing characterizing them “as a direct product of the new school techniques and attention to the significance of composition.”[@jorjaniExhibitionIranianFine1946 p. 28]

*The Uprising of Kaveh*, which earned Ziapour the third prize, depicts a heroic scene from Ferdowsi's Shahnameh (Shāhnāmeh), the 11th-century Persian epic poem. The painting captures the legendary blacksmith Kaveh leading a rebellion against Zahhāk, a foreign tyrant who treacherously usurped the throne.
At the center of the composition, Kaveh stands tall, his arms raised in a powerful call to action against the tyrannical rule of Zahhak. The painting pulses with tension as a fervent crowd, armed and determined, surges forward in a formidable charge. In a striking display of foreshortening, a soldier lies fallen on Kaveh’s right foot, adding to the dramatic intensity of the scene.

The turbulent arrangement of figures and heightened emotional intensity in Ziapour's composition evokes notable parallels with French Romantic masterworks, like Eugène Delacroix's *The Barque of Dante* (1822) and Théodore Géricault's *The Raft of the Medusa* (1819). Similarly, the horizontal traversal of the canvas by Kaveh's forces, moving distinctively from right to left in the foreground, demonstrates compelling affinities, though in reverse moving direction, with Antoine-Jean Gros's monumental battle scenes, including his *Battle of Aboukir* (1806) and *Battle of Eylau* (1808, @fig:gros).

The Shahnameh of Ferdowsi stands as a foundational pillar of Iranian cultural heritage, playing a pivotal role in shaping Iranian national consciousness.
The epic has proved particularly adaptable as founding myths for Iranian nationalism since the 20th century.[^1] Among these stories, the tale of Kaveh's rebellion against Zahhāk became an especially powerful allegory for resistance against tyranny and the struggle for national sovereignty.
The story's nationalist resonance found early modern visual expression when it appeared on the cover of the influential periodical *Kaveh* (@fig:kavehMag). This Berlin-based publication, established by the Iranian statesman Sayyed Hasan Taghizadeh (1878–1970) and circulated from January 24, 1916, to March 30, 1922, coincided with what Mirsepassi identifies as a crucial period in the development of Iranian nationalism.[@mirsepassiDiscoveryIranTaghi2021]

To art historian Alice Bombardier, the story of Kaveh “was embedded with nationalist undertones,” particularly because of the Azerbaijan Crisis in 1946.[@bombardierPioneersIranianNew2020 p. 108]
The crisis unfolded when the Soviet Union failed to honor its agreement to withdraw from the occupied territories in northern Iran, resulting in a significant political and diplomatic fallout.
Even though the Soviet forces eventually withdrew, the crisis left lasting scars and fostered distrust between the nations.
Considering the historical circumstances, it is even harder to miss the symbolism of the narrative as an allegory of resistance against foreign intruders.

Nevertheless, Bombardier’s claim that *The Uprising of Kaveh* conveys anti-Soviet nationalist sentiments runs into a problem when she attempts to square it with the painting’s recognition in the Soviet-sponsored exhibition.
“Most likely,” she contends, “this painting was recognized and rewarded less for the content of the work, which rejects the Russian presence, than for the form, which was aligned with the Soviet artistic creed theorized in 1922.”[@bombardierPioneersIranianNew2020 p. 108]
The suggestion that the painting garnered recognition purely on aesthetic merit, independent of its thematic elements, attributes an implausible degree of political naïveté to the exhibition's organizers, among them the highly respected and erudite Maryan Firuz (1913--2008) who founded the Tudeh Women's Organization of Iran. This interpretation appears seriously tenuous given that the selection committee included Iranian cultural figures and intellectuals who possessed both intimate familiarity with the work's subject matter and ideological affinities with the Soviet state. Their sophisticated understanding of the cultural and political landscape makes such oversight highly unlikely.

[^1]: The modern interpretation of the Shahnameh as a source of national identity developed during the Constitutional Revolution, when intellectuals recognized the text's potential beyond political mobilization---they saw it as a powerful tool for teaching the public about patriotism and civic responsibility. See@ansariPoliticsNationalismModern2012 p. 55  
