
\section{General Introduction}\label{chap:1}


When readers’ gaze fell on the first issue of _Khorus Jangi_ (The Fighting Rooster) in 1949, they would be immediately arrested by the cover image (fig.\ref{fig:ziapour-khorus}) designed by Iranian modernist artist Jalil Ziapour (1920–1999). A lone, majestic rooster stood within a frame, devoid of any accompanying title or context, leaving the viewer in eager anticipation of what lies ahead. The rooster’s self-confident posture would strike the most—beak agape, chest thrust forward, one foot planted firmly behind, wings outstretched, while its angular lines and geometric composition convey that it belongs to an era of machines. Its posture, anchored by a sturdy triangular base, and its piercing gaze, locked on an invisible point beyond the frame, radiate a sense of unyielding alertness and resolve rather than impulsively charging forward. The rooster appears to be addressing an invisible audience beyond the frame as if heralding a pivotal moment in history. This visual rhetoric evokes the modernist imperative for collective action, urging the masses to seize agency in shaping their own destiny and, by extension, to inscribe themselves into the broader historical schema.


Upon turning the page, readers would encounter “From the City of Morning” (_Az shahr-e Sobh_) by modernist poet Nima Yushij (commonly known under his pen name Nima), confirming the initial impression conveyed by the cover image.[^1] In its strategic positioning following the image, Nima’s verse functions as a literary corollary to the pictorial proclamation, amplifying the periodical’s avant-garde imperative to precipitate societal metamorphosis through aesthetic awakening. The poem emerges as a declaration of cultural renaissance, while its deliberate juxtaposition with Ziapour’s gallinaceous figure intimates a calculated coalition between poets and visual artists in their concurrent pursuit of modernist ideals.[^2] Ziapour explains:

>In our ancient literature, the rooster, as a messenger of the angel Bahman, would crow at dawn from atop the fences, awakening people and calling them to work and endeavor. For this reason, since it crowed and sounded the wake-up call, we chose the rooster as our symbol, both for what we were doing and for its beauty.[^3]

Upon learning of this symbolically resonant choice, Nima responded by contributing both the aforementioned poem and a series of pedagogical essays entitled “Words from the Neighbor (harfhay-e hamsayeh),” demonstrating his sustained commitment to their modernist enterprise.[^4]

In his composition, Ziapour synthesized ancient Persian iconography, specifically the mythological creatures adorning Persepolis’ processional friezes, with contemporary modernist sensibilities.[^5] This fusion extended to incorporate Picasso’s rooster imagery, which emerged as a potent symbol of French resurgence during the Nazi occupation.[^6] While Picasso’s renditions featured fluid, playful contours, Ziapour’s interpretation embraced geometric precision, embodying technological advancement through angular forms and linear elements.

This mechanical interpretation of the rooster as a herald of modernization finds its literary parallel in Nima’s poetry, but the symbol takes on political dimensions. Nima’s “From the City of Morning” narrates an awakening led by a rooster, echoing Immanuel Kant's formulation of enlightenment as a gradual process of liberation from ‘the inability to use one’s understanding without guidance from another.” Kant recognized—and Nima seems to agree—the constraints on and necessity of freedom for enlightenment, as “a public can only slowly arrive at enlightenment.”[^7]  In Nima’s poem, the rooster’s “Cock-a-doodle-doo” serves as a rallying cry for the enlightened few—the caravan—to navigate through the darkness towards a new dawn. But the process cannot be rushed Kant distinguishes between an "enlightened age" and an “age of enlightenment,” asserting that while his era had not achieved full enlightenment, it was actively progressing towards it.[^8] “From the City of Morning” echoes this view through its portrayal of a liminal temporality—a transitional period where night recedes, but dawn has not yet fully broken. 

In Nima’s poem, the caravan's journey symbolizes the gradual enlightenment process. As it advances, it allows the public to join, mirroring the way enlightenment spreads through society. The enlightened individuals—artists and literati among them—embody Kant's notion of those who have freed themselves from intellectual immaturity. “Who is it who has fallen behind? / Who is it, who is tired?” Nima challenges readers to join the caravan towards a new collective reality.  By exercising their public reason, they contribute to society's gradual enlightenment, embodying the Kantian imperative to dare to know (“Sapere aude!”).

 The cover of *Khorus Jangi* proclaimed its cultural mission: “Increasing the culture of Iranians with the Fighting Rooster association.”[^9] The statement encapsulates the avant-garde's commitment to cultural enlightenment in mid-twentieth-century Iran while positioning these artists within a broader historical narrative of emancipation that traces back to the Iranian Constitutional Revolution of 1905-1911. Following in the footsteps of Nima, avant-garde artists like Jalil Ziapour saw themselves as the inheritors of this revolutionary spirit, envisioning their role as contributors to the public use of reason by liberating art from traditional constraints. Thus, he—like many of his like-minded artists—viewed his work as a continuation of the progressive ideals that had animated Iranian intellectuals since the Constitutional era, adapting the struggle for political and social reform to the realm of culture and aesthetics.


[^1]: Please refer to the appendix for the English transcript of the poem.
[^2]: This alliance is unsurprising given the poet's long-standing role as the vanguard of cultural awakening and poetry's far stronger tradition of modernism compared to the fine arts. As Shiva Balaghi observes, “increasingly the role of artist was fused with that of the poet, the long-standing conscience of Iranian society” @balaghiIranianVisualArts2002[31]
[^3]: @ziapourAnthologyJalilZiapours[287]
[^4]: @ziapourAnthologyJalilZiapours[287].  In traditional Iranian literature, the rooster (*khorus*) was considered a symbol of wakefulness and was associated with Bahman, the divine being. At dawn, the rooster was believed to announce Bahman’s arrival. In Zoroastrian texts written in Pahlavi and in broader Zoroastrian tradition, the rooster was associated with the spiritual being ('*yazata*') known as *Sraosha* in the Avesta. In Islamic belief, the rooster became a symbol of awakening for the morning prayer.  @foroutanWhyFightingCock2016[xxxiii]
[^5]: According to Foroutan, Ziapour’s Khorus was inspired by the friezes at Persepolis. @foroutanWhyFightingCock2016[xxxiii] 
[^6]: @foroutanWhyFightingCock2016[xxxvii] 
[^7]: @kantPerpetualPeaceOther2010[8:36]
[^8]: @kantPerpetualPeaceOther2010
[^9]: Cited in @nahidiCulturalPoliticsArt2023[238] See the cover of Fighting Rooster Magazine, no. 1 (Tehran, 1948).